December 2013

Prompt:  Describe a place or environment where you are perfectly content. What do you do or experience there, and why is it meaningful to you?

Serenity and peace of mind are often attributed to more natural environments such as Siddhartha Gautama's Bodhi tree. Indeed such locations have a place in my heart, but I always found a greater sense of belonging in a stranger location. A seemingly ordinary conference room with a single table in the local library offers what Gautama's Bodhi tree cannot. For nearly four years, this hidden realm in a small library in a smaller town has been my abode from October to May; nay, it is a place of intellectual discussion that far triumphs any philosophy I developed in the "naturalness" of Central Park in my childhood. It represents a sea of infinite possibilities in which I wade willingly to truly embrace education.

Four years ago, with a less practical mindset, I embarked on an unlikely journey, expecting to push unmotivated intelligent students for their calculus classes. My first year, I taught only two students, both of whom required just this extra motivation. However, the year after, I met my match. Several students had heard about me and asked if I could teach them also. These second-year algebra students had no calculus experience and required complete instruction. I came to build a curriculum, create lessons/tests, and develop a system that allowed these students to check their grades as in a real class. The petty lessons had blossomed into weekly three-hour calculus sessions for six curious students in a provocative room.

As I evolved into this harmonious instructor, I elected to swim away from the shallow shoreline of my reluctance to help others learn. Indeed thereafter the room came to represent the staple of my teachings, mathematical or otherwise. I looked forward to the weekly trips to the library, basking in the beautiful light that the differentials on the whiteboard reflected in the waves of the sea floor. I once arrived an hour early simply to sit at the head of the table and enjoy the serenity of a room that stimulated intellectual thought and understanding.

Beyond enabling me to appreciate the value of teaching and helping others, the conference room and its ideal setup also helped in constructing a community. The circular table in the room created a sense of a group rather than the teacher-student segregation of the traditional classroom. The value of the collaboration that ensued from this setting was priceless. Many a session we put aside our curriculum and discussed significant factors that affected our thoughts, such as the possibility of free will coexisting with divine preordination. What never ceased to amaze me was the fervency with which the students approached these discussions; initially they would look to me for input, but eventually grew independent as they questioned beliefs.

The students' aptitude for tying discussions back to mathematical principles taught earlier allowed us to champion societal values from a mathematical perspective. Indeed these reticent students were coaxed into becoming thoughtful individuals in society. In the third year, when I implemented similar strategies with fifteen new students, though individualized instruction diminished, the sense of community never wavered. I came to realize that the room provided these students with the same comfort I had encountered one Sunday two years previously, an hour early. It had become our room.

Over the years, the conference room enabled me to flourish as an individual and as part of a larger community. The lessons redoubled my appreciation of mathematics as an individual and the discussions allowed me to understand others from a different perspective. When I enter the conference room for the last time this year, I will feel a surge of nostalgia for the community of twenty and alumni I shall leave behind after this fourth and final year. Nevertheless, the ruminations of intellectual thought never falter as I wade in this finitely infinite perfect gray sea, always surrounded yet never confined by my Room of Contentment. I am at peace with myself.

Words entered: 650
